The Bid for PASS

In the spring of 2006 I got an email from the PASS board of directors that outlined their RFP process for services. They had been using a company since their inception, but were considering changing and offered us the opportunity to bid.

We'd considered running our own conference, bidding for PASS, and any number of other options over the years, but this was our first serious foray into the area.

I wasn't sure it was worth bidding the hosting. Early on we'd wanted the business because we were of similar size to PASS. Both about 10-15k members. Now we far surpassed their size and I didn't think it was any great benefit, nor would it amount to serious money. I figured PASS would want to pay about $2k a month.

Andy disagreed. He could see this being $4-5k a month, so we decided to submit a basic bid. I wrote one up, let Andy and Brian make some suggestions and we sent it off in March or April of 2006.

We didn't hear anything until the beginning of June, just before TechEd. One of the PASS board members wanted to sit down with us at TechEd and talk. With the training center underway and me not wanting to travel, Brian was the only one of us attending, so he say down briefly at PASS and it seemed they were interseted. Since they hadn't balked at our $5k a month initial bid, we thought this was worth pursuing, especially as it would be a nice boost to our cash flow.

We initially sent a few questions through email to our contact and received a much larger number of questions back from them with our offer. Since our contact lived near Orlando, he came down to meet with Andy at the beginning of July and spent an afternoon talking over more of the details. We learned a lot from that meeting with Andy spending a few hours on the phone discussing it with me as we went over the needs, wishes, and desired of PASS as well as our revenue numbers.

That was a Friday afternoon and with a few hours that afternoon and more phone calls and work the next morning, I got an initial proposal from Andy that was 26 pages, up from our 6 that I'd drafted and set about reviewing it.

Andy and I flew to Chicago for the board meeting. This was the 2nd one we'd attended, the last being the fiasco in Denver in 2005. After enjoying a brief lunch and some late Chicago summer sunshine, we headed over to the CA building. They're one of the primary sponsors of PASS and they donate some time from a couple employees as well as the space for meetings. The board was in session, so we camped out nearby.

During a break, the members slowly filtered out to meet us and say hi. They needed to get a few things squared away with other companies and let the Smith Bucklin people leave before discussing the RFP. We waited, chatting with a few people that slipped out for a minute to say hi at various times.

When we entered the board meeting, there were two things we needed to discuss. The magazine and the hosting RFP.

The magazine discussion was almost a mirror of the one the year before. Questioning us on price, how we felt, did we like the magazine, and lots of debate about whether it was worth the cost to PASS. They see a $60-80k pricetag afor the magazine every year, split out among the six issues. And that seems like a lot, but it's really a $12/yr/member price that I tried to stress.

The hosting RFP was really presented by one of the board members and then we fielded questions. However just like the year before it seemed that this big item wasn't presented to anyone before we arrived. Since we weren't thinking to do a presentation, just answer questions and negotiate, we were unprepared again.

It seemed the board was fairly split, but overall not excited about another $60k bill each year. They were also unprepared for moving forward, at least not to the extent we expected, so they decided they'd continue to develop their plan and then get back to us.

Almost a waste of a trip, but it was some good time for Andy and I to sit down and talk about the business.


