4. First Sale

We ran the site for about 6 months on the $350 investment that seven of us had made. With a $30 hosting account and some minor other expenses, we had gotten by pretty well, but the funds were running out. Six of us had made quite a time investment in coding, converting content, answering forum posts, etc. and the time came for us to decide how to move forward.

We had some email exchanges and at some point the six of us decided to refund the 7th person's investment because they hadn't really participated. I wish I could say it was an amicable parting, but it wasn't. He was upset, and probably more so as we've grown over time, but we really felt he hadn't worked at all for us and it was time to move on.

With the ownership clarified for now, the six of us had a conference call one night trying to decide how to proceed. A friend of Brian's had offered to sell advertising for us through his company that was selling other web advertising and we could just cash the checks he sent us. Since none of us had had any luck selling to date, this seemed like a good way to proceed. There was just one catch, however.

The "fee" for selling this advertising was 50% of the revenue.

This was our first big business decision. On one hand, paying someone $500 of $1000 revenue seemed like a huge amount of money. One the other hand, 50% of the $0 we'd sold wasn't too much and $500 would keep things going. We were going to need to get some more money for hosting soon as well as some legal expenses, so this was attractive to Brian, myself, and I think a couple others.

You see we had not as of yet incorporated the company and that was another piece of business that was unresolved. Brian and I were happy to proceeed on a gentleman's agreement until we had the money to officially incorporate. I'd worked with him over the Internet for over a year and I trusted him, despite having never met him. But everyone else wanted things officially done with a lawyer and that would cost us some money.

I'm moving between two things here because the discussion had both of these things intertwined. To move forward and incorporate as well as continue the site, we needed funding. Brian and I were pushing for the site to support itself as we didn't want to invest more money in it until we had some revenue coming in. Our argument was that we should tkae the deal for a year, let some revenue come in, support the site, pay for the lawyer, etc.

Andy was dead set against giving away 50% of our revenue and thought we should all be willing to build a business and just invest more money. A good long term decision. His argument was $300, the amount we were talking about, wasn't much money and it would protect us all and establish everyone as partners with "skin in the game".
